---
layout: default
title: Introduction to VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner) Sentiment Analysis tool
nav_order: 3
---

# Introduction to VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner) Sentiment Analysis tool

## Introduction

In this sentiment analysis project, my reasoning for choosing VADER was to reduce the drawbacks of using sentiment analysis tools in social media textual content. VADER is designed for the purpose of assessing social media textual productions. Social media textual data are particularly challenging for sentiment analysis tools because they tend to be shorter, contextually sparser, and use forms of abbreviation that might not be found in other contexts of writing. As a result, natural language processing models that are not prepared to work with social media content struggle to offer adequate results due to the recontextualized use of language in digital platforms. For instance, abbreviations, acronyms, internet language, and so on. The authors developed VADER model by reviewing the lexicon of other established models for sentiment analysis (for instance, LIWC, GI, Hu-Liu04) and crossed this data with other sentiment analysis models that explore the intensity of sentiments (for instance, ANEW , SentiWordNet , and SenticNet). Later on, they enhanced the VADER model through the use of Machine Learning and performed statistical tests comparing the scores generated by VADER and the previous models along with human assessments. This study was particularly decisive for me to privilege the use of VADER rather than other models (for example, pure R with Hu-Liu lexicon) because they conducted careful benchmarks and statistical comparisons that have corroborated the use of VADER as the golden standard option for analyzing social media textual data comparing to the other models available at the time of the analysis. 

You can check more about VADER sentiment analysis tool here:

Hutto, C., and Eric Gilbert. "VADER: A Parsimonious Rule-Based Model for Sentiment Analysis of Social Media Text." *Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media*, vol. 8, no. 1, May 2014, pp. 216--25. DOI.org (Crossref),[  https://doi.org/10.1609/icwsm.v8i1.14550](https://doi.org/10.1609/icwsm.v8i1.14550).



## Hands on!

Below I have a text sample so you can try different phrases and see how VADER works. Try to change the text and see how the results change. 


```python
# Import necessary libraries
from vaderSentiment.vaderSentiment import SentimentIntensityAnalyzer

# Create an instance of SentimentIntensityAnalyzer
analyzer = SentimentIntensityAnalyzer()

# Define some example text to analyze
text = "Susanna, don't worry!"

# Analyze the sentiment of the text
scores = analyzer.polarity_scores(text)

# Print the sentiment scores
print(scores)
```

    {'neg': 0.0, 'neu': 0.426, 'pos': 0.574, 'compound': 0.4015}
    

## Interpreting the results

The scores can be divided in negative, neutral, positive, and compound. The compound score is the sum of all the lexicon ratings normalized between -1 (most extreme negative) and +1 (most extreme positive).

The positive, negative, and neutral scores represent the proportion of text that falls in these categories. This means our sentence was rated as 67% positive, 33% neutral and 0% negative. Hence all these should add up to 1.

The compound score is computed by summing the valence scores of each word in the lexicon, adjusted according to the rules, and then normalized to be between -1 (most extreme negative) and +1 (most extreme positive). This is the most useful metric if you want a single unidimensional measure of sentiment for a given sentence. Calling it a 'normalized, weighted composite score' is accurate.
